# Job control

**Job control** is a facility that allows users selectively to stop (suspend) the execution of processes and continue (resume) their execution at a later point. It also allows users to interrupt running processes.

## Why is job control useful?

Let's start with a simple example. Suppose you have started a command to download a file, but you realize that the network is down and want to cancel the download. With job control, you can interrupt the command by pressing the `intr` key sequence (usually `Ctrl-C`), which sends a `SIGINT` signal to the foreground process, terminating it.

```shell,no_run
$ curl 'http://example.com/largefile.zip' > largefile.zip
^C
$
```

Job control allows you to move processes between the foreground and background, giving you flexibility in managing multiple tasks in the shell. Suppose you are running a command that removes a large number of files:

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD014 -->
```shell,no_run
$ rm -rf ~/.my_cache_files
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD014 -->

You realize that the command is taking too long, and you wish you had started it in the background so you could continue using the shell. With job control, you can suspend the command running in the foreground and then resume it in the background. To do so, you press the `susp` key sequence (usually `Ctrl-Z`), which sends a `SIGTSTP` signal to the foreground process, suspending it. The shell then displays a message indicating that the job has been stopped:

```shell,no_run
^Z[1] + Stopped(SIGTSTP)     rm -rf ~/.my_cache_files
```

You can then resume the job in the background by typing:

```shell,no_run
$ bg
[1] rm -rf ~/.my_cache_files
```

Now the command continues running in the background, and you can continue using the shell for other tasks. If you want to bring the job back to the foreground, you can use the `fg` command:

```shell,no_run
$ fg
rm -rf ~/.my_cache_files
```

Another useful scenario is when you use an editor to edit a file, but you want to run a command in the shell while the editor is open. You can suspend the editor with `susp` (`Ctrl-Z`), run the command, and then return to the editor with `fg`.

## How does job control work?

When the shell starts a [subshell], it creates a new process group for that subshell. If the subshell is run synchronously (in the foreground), the shell makes the subshell the foreground process group of the terminal. The foreground process group receives signals generated by key sequences like `intr` (interrupt) and `susp` (suspend). When a process in the foreground receives a `SIGINT` signal, it is typically terminated. When it receives a `SIGTSTP` signal, it is suspended.

When a foreground process is suspended, the shell displays a message indicating that the job has been stopped, and continues to read a next command. The shell maintains a list of jobs so that you can manage them later. When you use the `fg` built-in, the shell makes the specified job the foreground process group again and sends it a `SIGCONT` signal to resume its execution. If you use the `bg` built-in, the shell just sends the job a `SIGCONT` signal, allowing it to continue running in the background.

All commands in a [pipeline] run in the same process group. This allows you to manage the entire pipeline as a single job.

When the shell is reading input, it makes itself the foreground process group of the terminal. This means that key sequences like `intr` and `susp` send signals to the shell itself. However, the shell configures itself to ignore these signals, so that the job control shell is protected from being interrupted or suspended unintentionally.

## Enabling job control

By default, job control is enabled if (and only if) the shell is [interactive](index.html). Specify the `monitor` [shell option](../environment/options.md) to enable or disable job control on shell startup or during a shell session:

```sh
yash3 -o monitor
```

## Job control details

Job control is a complex feature, and yash-rs implements it basically according to the POSIX.1-2024 standard, with some deviations. Behavior that does not strictly conform to POSIX is marked with ⚠️.

### Building blocks of job control

A **process** is a running instance of a program, which may be the shell itself or an external utility. Each process belongs to a **process group**, which is a collection of processes that can be managed together. Each process group in turn belongs to a **session**, which is a collection of process groups.

When a process creates another process, the new process is called a **child process** of the original process, which is called the **parent process**. Child processes inherit certain attributes from their parent process, such as the process group and session they belong to, but they can also create new process groups and sessions.

In the context of job control, a **terminal** is an entity managed by the operating system to provide facilities for shells to implement job control. A terminal can be associated with a session, in which case it is called a **controlling terminal**. A process group can be selected as the **foreground process group** of the associated controlling terminal. The foreground process group receives signals generated by key sequences like `intr` and `susp`. The other process groups in the session are called **background process groups**.

From now on, controlling terminals are referred to simply as terminals when it is clear from the context.

A **job** is a [subshell] that is implemented as a child process of the shell. (⚠️This terminology differs from POSIX, which uses "job" to refer to a broader sequence of commands, including lists.) Each job is identified by a unique **job number**, which is a positive integer assigned by the shell when the job is created. The job number is used to refer to the job in built-in utilities like `fg`, `bg`, and `jobs`.

### Basic job control behavior

When job control is enabled, the shell manages each [subshell] as a job. Each job is created in a new process group, which allows controlling the job independently of other processes. A multi-command [pipeline] is treated as a single job, with all commands in the pipeline running in the same process group. ⚠️Subshells created for [command substitutions](../language/words/command_substitution.md) are not treated as jobs, and thus do not create a new process group, because the shell does not support suspending and resuming whole commands containing command substitutions.

Except when the shell is starting an [asynchronous command], the shell runs the job as the foreground process group of the terminal. This directs signals produced by key sequences like `intr` and `susp` to the job rather than the shell itself or background jobs.

When a foreground job terminates or suspends, the shell brings itself back to the foreground. This allows the shell to continue running remaining commands (which may create other jobs) and reading next commands from the terminal. Note that the shell can only examine the status of its direct child processes. Descendant processes created as part of a job do not affect the shell's job control.

Job control do not recursively affect nested subshells. However, if a subshell starts another shell that supports job control, the new shell can manage jobs independently of the parent shell.

### Suspending foreground jobs

When you press the `susp` key sequence (usually `Ctrl-Z`), the terminal sends a `SIGTSTP` signal to the foreground process group. The processes may respond to this signal in different ways, depending on how they are programmed, but typically they will suspend their execution.

When a foreground job suspends, the shell displays a message indicating that the job has been stopped, and discards any pending commands that have been read but not yet executed. This is to prevent the shell from executing commands that may depend on the result of the suspended job, which is not yet finished. (⚠️POSIX.1-2024 allows discarding commands only up to and including the next asynchronous command, but yash-rs discards all pending commands.)

### Job list

The shell maintains a list of jobs, which includes information about each job's number, process (group) ID, status, and command string. The shell updates this list as jobs are created, terminated, or suspended.

When a foreground job terminates, the shell removes it from the job list. If a job terminates in the background, the shell keeps it in the job list so that the user can see its status and retrieve its exit status later. Such jobs are removed from the list when their result is retrieved using the `jobs` or `wait` built-ins. The shell also updates the job list when a job is suspended or resumed.

### Job numbers

When a job is created, the shell assigns it a unique job number, regardless of whether job control is enabled. The job number is assigned sequentially, starting from 1. After a job is removed from the job list, its job number may be reused for a new job.

### Jobs without job control

Each [asynchronous command] started when job control is disabled is also managed as a job, but it runs in the same process group as the shell. Signals generated by key sequences like `intr` and `susp` are sent to the whole process group, which includes the shell and the asynchronous command. This means that the job cannot be interrupted, suspended, or resumed independently of the shell. The shell still assigns a job number to the job and maintains it in the job list so that the user can see its status and retrieve its exit status later.

### Background shells

When a shell starts job control, if the shell is in the background, it suspends itself until it is brought to the foreground by another process. This is to prevent the shell from disturbing the current foreground process group. (⚠️POSIX.1-2024 requires that the shell use `SIGTTIN` to suspend itself in this case, but yash-rs uses `SIGTTOU` instead. See [the comment on Issue #421](https://github.com/magicant/yash-rs/issues/421#issuecomment-2717123069) for rationale.)

⚠️POSIX.1-2024 requires that the shell make sure that it is a process group leader (the first process in a new process group) when it starts job control. However, yash-rs does not currently implement this requirement. See [Issue #483](https://github.com/magicant/yash-rs/issues/483) for why this cannot be implemented straightforwardly.

### Termios

TBD

## Current and previous jobs

TBD

## Job ID

Some built-in utilities, such as `fg` and `kill`, use a **job ID** to refer to a job. The job ID is a string that matches one of the following formats:

TBD

## Built-ins for job control

(TBD: kill, jobs, etc.)
(TBD: organize this section into subsections)

## Job control in non-interactive shells

TBD

## Compatibility

Job control is a complex feature and existing implementations differ in various ways. Perfect POSIX compliance should not be expected in any shell, and yash-rs is no exception.

[asynchronous command]: ../language/commands/lists.md#asynchronous-commands
[pipeline]: ../language/commands/pipelines.md
[subshell]: ../environment/index.html#subshells

(TBD: I think we should have many more examples in this section)
(TBD: Review the whole section for consistency, completeness, and fluency before polishing it up.)
