# Documentation readme

This directory contains the documentation for yash-rs. It is written in Markdown and converted to HTML using [`mdbook`](https://rust-lang.github.io/mdBook/). The documentation is organized into various sections, each covering different aspects of the shell language, built-in utilities, and shell features. The documentation rendered from the latest master branch is hosted at <https://magicant.github.io/yash-rs/>.

## Prerequisites

Install `mdbook` to build the documentation. You can install it using `cargo`:

```sh
cargo install mdbook
```

## Directory structure

See the mdbook documentation for more details on the structure and build setup.

- `src/`: Contains the source files for the documentation.
    - `SUMMARY.md`: The table of contents for the documentation.
    - Under the `src` directory, all files are used to generate the documentation pages. Files named `README.md` are converted to `index.html` in their respective directories.
- `book/`: The output directory where the built documentation is stored. This is generated by running `mdbook build`.
- `book.toml`: The configuration file for mdbook.
- `doctest.sh`: A hand-written shell script that runs the examples in the documentation to ensure they work as expected. It is used to verify that the examples in the documentation are correct and executable.

Use the `check-docs.sh` script in the parent directory to build the documentation and run all tests in the documentation.

## Linking

To link to other sections of the documentation, use relative links in Markdown format.

- In the `src/SUMMARY.md` file, all files are referred to by their true pathnames. Pathnames ending with `/README.md` are converted to `index.html` in their respective directories.
- In other Markdown files, to link to a file named `README.md`, use the relative path ending with `/index.html` because the pathnames are not converted to `index.html` in the rendered HTML due to <https://github.com/rust-lang/mdBook/issues/984>.
